HackHarvard 2016 was the second annual HackHarvard hackathon event. It was the largest hackathon at Harvard University and took place from October 21-23, 2016 at the Harvard Student Organization Center at Hilles (the SOCH).  There were 551 registered attendees, up from 489 in our first year.

As director, my role was to manage an organizing team of 25 individual broken down into four sub-commitees (Logistics, Partnerships, Hacker Relations, Design).

The Logistics commitee handles anything to do with the three days of the event itself, including food, transportation, schedule, room reservations, etc.  They work closely with Hacker Relations which handles all attendee-related functions including our official website, marketing, application review/acceptance, social media, and attendee questions. Partnerships is the back-end team that mostly handles corporate sponsorships, mentors, judges, and other non-attendee external relations.  And design is the final team who's job is supplemental to the other teams, in that they design the visuals for our email communications, the visuals for the website, and any on-site banners/signs at the hackathon event.

These four teams are supplemented by one management team which we refer to as the "core" team internally.  Externally, these four are known as our directors.  Other than the directors, all the other members are known as managers. The HackHarvard leadership structure is extremely flat and only has these two tiers - managers report to directors. When the hackathon occurs, we have a number of volunteers just for the weekend - those people report directly to our managers.

I played a major part in designing this leadership structure after experiencing frustration with the leadership structures of other student clubs.  Most other large Harvard clubs follow a four-tier leadership structure - at the top you have co-presidents, the senior executive board, other leadership roles, then associates. What I've found is that in this leadership structure, the top and bottom of the leadership structure end up doing everything; the president is responsible for the success of the club, so he or she is invested. The associates are typically freshmen so they want to contribute in hopes of moving up.  The middle tiers (senior executive board and other leadership) more often than not don't end up doing anything.

This hurts the club president(s) because they end up doing an obscene amount of work.  This hurts the associate (freshmen) members because they want to contribute, but don't get real leadership roles where they can make decisions until they are older.  The ideal system spreads around the responsibility of the club president while empowering associate-level members by giving them positions of responsibility.

