Business model - how do you scale this company? Answer: we are sass

Do you have a trial period of some kind?

Three month launch, work with company to do onboarding, 80% retention.

How are you finding customers? We have a lot of inbound, people switch companies and set up at their new companies. (look up the word inbound)

Contributors aren't paid, but there's a reward system (access, product)

If I'm a contributor, I want a collection of my videos - I would pay a premium to hold onto those.  Maybe have a premium model for the consumer?

What's the contract value of the 100 customers, average $60k for the year.

Do you have churn?  Roughly 20% churn because customers set up on a not fully developed platform yet.

Last question - why are you doing this?



What's your ideal target customer? Large media, gonna be B2B, needs targeted digital content

Can this solution compete with analytic solutions?  We assume analytic solutions will disappear because they're too slow

Do you build user profiles based on actions?  Cold-start brand new for users, then the profile is built in real time

Do you get data from other sites?  No, we just get it from one site.

What's your revenue model? It's click-based per ad

Why are you gonna win?  Our technology is superior, every site should already doing it.



Science hackathon - Scithon - offered to limited partners in Spring 2017. (fee + prize) Saas which is $/user/year eventually becoming API enterprise

early stage of rnd outsourcing market (confirmed $7 billion market)

Iris is learning from user data, trainer data, Scithon Data

Iris.AI currently brings in

Questions:

The markets for this are incredibly valuable for a small set of people, and of no value to a large number of people.  We're looking at 11 million people working in RND. The Scithon is the go-to-market strategy.  Third step of the process is connecting to internal RND databases

I'd encourage you to look into other markets like medical and .. (the core technology that we have can grow on those particular areas)

What's your vision?  How does mankind, the world, benefit from Iris?

How are you gonna charge for this, how are you gonna sell?  Companies are charged per event, then move to a SaaS model.

Judgde would encourage founders to price this extremely high - if you price it high, people believe there's a lot of value. Price determines position.

Is there a competitive dynamic?  Semantic Scholar and a few others working in the scientific paper space, general tech people.